Morton’s dishonored
my daughter.
‐ They can’t stay here.
‐ JAMIE: Ye’ll leave at dawn.
The lass has smallpox.
Throw her overboard.
‐ Please don’t.
‐ [ screams ]
Have you lost your mind?
And I’ll do the same for any
who show signs of a rash.
I can help keep you hidden.
‐ I dinna ken your name.
‐ Roger.
‐ Morag MacKenzie.
‐ I’m a MacKenzie as well.
I must admit,
I have grown quite fond
of North Carolina.
Pain me to leave it in chaos.
And farmers though we be,
we’ve beat our plowshares
into swords
and are training for battle.
How many men do ye have?
Go to it, lads.
[ dramatic music ]
The Regulators are
disorganized.
No way prepared for war
against the Crown.
I had hoped it wouldn’t
come to this,
but it seems we’re gonna have
our war after all.
CHOIR:
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say, could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
♪ Billow and breeze ♪
♪ Islands and seas ♪
♪ Mountains of rain and sun ♪
♪ Mountains of rain
and sun ♪
♪ All that was good ♪
♪ All that was fair ♪
♪ All that was me ♪
♪ Is gone ♪
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass that is gone ♪
♪ Say, could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
♪ Merry of soul ♪
♪ She sailed on a day ♪
♪ Over the sea ♪
♪ To Skye ♪
[ dramatic music ]
♪
WOMAN:
♪ Sing me a song ♪
♪ Of a lass ♪
♪ That is gone ♪
♪ Say, could that lass ♪
♪ Be I? ♪
CLAIRE:
We went to Hillsborough ready
for what outcome,
we couldn’t know.
But a good soldier is taught
to be prepared,
ready to fight,
and ready to die if need be.
But what no one
can prepare for
is to face family
in the time of war.
ROGER:
♪ Drove she ducklings
to the water ♪
♪ Every morning,
just at nine ♪
♪ Hit her foot
against a splinter ♪
♪ Fell into the foaming brine ♪
♪ Oh, my darling,
oh, my darling ♪
♪ Oh, my darling Clementine ♪
♪ You are lost
and gone forever ♪
♪ Dreadful sorry, Clementine ♪
[ Jemmy coos ]
That’s all for today, laddie.
Your da has to go.
But I promise I will be back
to sing it again for you.
He never gets tired
of that one.
I still wish you’d stayed
at the Ridge.
I wanted to be as close to you
as I could for as long as
possible.
Lizzie, Jemmy,
and I will be safe
here in Hillsborough
with the Sherstons.
I’d better get on the road.
The Colonel will be
expecting me.
Come now,
we’ll get breakfast.
You know, if we were
back in Oxford in our own time,
we’d be making our lunchboxes
and seeing each other off
to work.
Now here I am seeing you off
to war.
[ solemn music ]
Come here.
♪
I barely knew my father
before he was killed
in World War II.
And Jemmy is much younger
than I was.
If I don’t make it back...
Hey, that is not
going to happen.
And while you are gone,
I will tell him
how brave his father is.
Maybe we’ll be lucky.
Maybe Billy Tryon will
come to his senses
and work things out peacefully
with these Regulators.
♪
But just in case, you know
all the words to "Clementine"?
[ laughs ]
Yes, but I’m no singer,
so you had better keep
your promise to your son.
♪
Good‐bye, Roger Mac.
Good‐bye, Mrs. Mac.
♪
[ door closes ]
‐ Hmm?
‐ Happy birthday, Colonel.
You taking stock?
[ both laugh ]
Something of the sort.
Well, I suppose I have
a few hours left.
I was born at half‐six.
I willna have lived
a half‐century
until suppertime.
Oh.
Do you expect to disintegrate
much before then?
Do you need me
to fetch you a cane?
[ groans ]
Or a hearing trumpet?
‐ Hmm?
‐ [ laughs ]
I dinna suppose anything’s
likely to fall off before then.
As for the workings...
‐ Oh.
‐ Huh.
‐ Well...
‐ It all seems to be
in perfect working order.
‐ Huh.
‐ There’s nothing loose at all.
‐ Uh‐huh.
‐ [ laughs ]
Good.
How did ye ken
what I was doing?
"Taking stock," as ye say.
I do it too
before every birthday.
Hmm.
I like to reflect
on the year past.
I think everybody does.
Just making sure that
you’re the same person
as you were the day before.
Ye dinna see
any marked changes,
do ye, Sassenach?
‐ Hmm?
‐ No.
[ whispers ]
You’re still you.
[ tender music ]
♪
It struck me...
I’ve now lived
longer than my father did.
Now this is a morning
he never saw.
He died when he was 49.
I’m sure he’d be happy to know
you’re alive...
with children and grandchildren
that love you.
Aye, mo chridhe.
The world and each day in it
is a gift.
Hmm.
Whatever tomorrow brings,
I’m grateful to see it.
And as for taking stock,
I’ve all my teeth...
‐ Mm‐hmm.
‐ None of my parts are missing,
and my cock still stands up
by itself in the morning.
Could be worse.
[ groans softly ]
♪
Hmm.
♪ Happy birthday to you ♪
[ chuckles ]
♪ Happy birthday ♪
‐ ♪ To you ♪
‐ Oh.
♪ Happy birthday,
dear Colonel ♪
[ moans softly ]
♪ Happy...♪
[ both breathing heavily ]
CLAIRE: ♪ Birthday ♪
♪ To you ♪
♪
GOVERNOR TRYON:
General Gage was good enough
to send two field pieces
and six swivel guns
from New York.
These insurgents
wanted a fight,
and they shall have one.
How many men do we have,
Your Excellency?
Uh, counting your company,
Colonel Fraser, 1,068.
Colonel Moore will command
the artillery,
Colonel Leech, the infantry.
Captain Bullock’s here
with the cavalry.
They’re camped
around the river bend.
COLONEL CHADWICK:
Uh, that’s not accounting
for General Waddell’s brigade.
He’s at Salisbury,
awaiting the arrival
of two wagonloads
of gunpowder from Charleston.
Sir.
The Regulators willna have
artillery and munitions
of this caliber.
They’re mostly farmers
with no military training.
Something they should be
mindful to consider
before provoking the Crown.
I trust your men are all
in order, Colonel Fraser?
Aye, they’re ready, sir.
Hmm.
[ dramatic music ]
[ horse whinnies ]
Well done, Colonel.
♪
Captain MacKenzie.
Reporting for duty, sir.
Fall in.
♪
JAMIE: Everyone.
Take one, pass ’em around.
It’s to be fastened
to yer coat or hat.
Other companies will have
cockades as well.
It’s the only way to tell
militia from Regulator,
so it’s important ye wear it.
I’ll have one of those.
Isaiah.
[ tense music ]
♪
Where’s my Alicia?
She with you?
No, she’s at home.
Her home was in Brownsville,
not living in sin with you,
you bastard‐‐
Easy now, everyone.
CLAIRE:
Alicia made her decision.
It’s her choice.
Why don’t you stay out of this?
Aye, it is a good life,
and we’re happy together.
What was good for her was
to be with her family.
I should have killed you
there and then,
nailed your hide
to the tavern door.
Enough.
♪
You shouldna be here.
Ye helped me once.
When I heard the troops
were mustering,
I wished to repay ye.
I see love hasn’t softened
yer hard head.
♪
This man is willing
to lay down his life.
I’ll not turn him away.
If ye canna find it
in yerselves
to fight alongside him,
ye may go.
♪
There’s a battle to fight.
This unpleasantness
between us...
should be forgotten.
♪
Attach this to yer coat.
[ dramatic music ]
♪
I’ve gone shooting every day
since we heard
there might be a war.
IAIN:
Shooting wood blocks
off a rail.
I shot eight possums last week.
War’s not like hunting.
The deer and the possums
are not trying to kill ye.
But Ma says the point of
hunting is to kill something,
and the point of going to war
is to come back alive.
War is killing, that’s that.
[ exhales deeply ]
Think of anything less,
think of yer own skin,
then ye’ll be dead
by nightfall.
Ye canna waver.
COLONEL CHADWICK:
Your Excellency!
A verbal message
from General Waddell.
Two wagonloads of munitions
have been ambushed
and destroyed,
and the general’s troops
were forced to retreat
by a large force of rebels
led by Murtagh Fitzgibbons.
And the scouts report
that the Regulators
are across the creek.
Prepare the men.
We’ll engage the enemy here.
♪
I’ll have my men
ready themselves.
♪
Did you see anything
across the creek?
Any sign of Murtagh?
No.
No, but I did see
Bryan Cranna and Lee Withers.
They were with Murtagh
in Hillsborough
during the riots.
Colonel, a minister come
from the other side
with a petition
for the governor.
A minister?
The Reverend Caldwell.
Reverend Caldwell...
I regret we meet again
under such circumstances.
Your Excellency,
Colonel Fraser.
Aye, a wedding is a‐a more
enjoyable occasion by far.
Mm.
I come in hopes
that we can settle this matter
without bloodshed.
Hmm.
Pardon me, Reverend,
if I disagree with
the assertion that I have not
"lent a kind ear to the just
complaints of the people."
I certainly do not consider
His Majesty’s subjects
to be mere "toys"
and their lives
"matters to be trifled with."
Still, nevertheless,
I will do as they ask.
I will consider
their grievances
and convey my "candid
and speedy response"
by, um, noon tomorrow.
Thank you, sir.
I will convey your answer,
and we will await
your final response.
Order the men to remain
under arms through the night.
Cavalry should
keep their mounts
bridled and saddled.
Your Excellency.
I’ll draft a proclamation
demanding their surrender.
Your Excellency, why not pursue
a parley, as they ask?
Their "petition for peace,"
Colonel Fraser,
was nothing but demands.
It is I who will not be
"trifled with."
Perhaps at least we wait
for reinforcements.
No, a bold stroke is needed.
To hesitate could mean defeat.
I am governor of this province,
and I cannot tolerate such
a blatant disregard for the law
to be allowed to go unpunished.
I will not.
Their course is set.
So is mine.
[ dramatic music ]
♪
Jemmy’s asleep.
Thanks, Lizzie.
We’re just so grateful
for your hospitality.
Anything Mr. Sherston and I can
do for your Aunt Jocasta.
[ door closes ]
There’s talk at the tavern.
The militia is preparing
for battle.
The Regulators are across
the Alamance Creek.
Where is that?
I can show you on a map.
Southwest of Hillsborough is
the Great Alamance Creek.
Wait.
Alamance...
Something happened there.
I seem to remember...
Have you ever been there?
No, it just‐‐the name
sounds familiar.
They say the Indians named it
and that it means
"all man’s land."
Something definitely
happened there.
Alamance...
♪
[ speaking Gaelic ]
So does God have an answer?
I wasna calling on God.
I was calling on
Dougal MacKenzie.
Dougal?
Considering how things ended
with us at Culloden...
why?
He was a war chief.
Taught me everything I know.
And I made my peace
with my uncle a long time ago.
Dougal will ken
I did what I had to do...
for my men, for ye.
And I’ll do it all again now.
I know you will.
Tryon’s determined to fight.
I’ve seen that look before
in men’s eyes...
when they’re beyond reason
or compromise.
Will Dougal help, do you think?
If he can.
We fought many times
together, Dougal and I,
hand to hand,
back to back.
After all, blood is blood.
Yes.
♪
But there’s someone else
that you share blood with.
Aye.
Murtagh and I fought
back to back as well.
This time,
we’ll fight face to face.
♪
No amount of prayer will help.
[ tense music ]
♪
‐ CLAIRE: Bree?
‐ JAMIE: Aye.
[ dramatic music ]
♪
I’ve come to warn you.
The fight happens here
at the creek,
and the militia will win.
How many lives are lost?
I don’t know numbers
or details.
My professor said that
some people consider this
to be the spark
of the American Revolution.
But the Regulators aren’t
trying to overthrow the Crown.
They aren’t fighting
for independence.
No, but they are rebelling
against corruption
and unfair taxes.
Ye’re certain Tryon wins?
Yes.
[ sighs ]
I must get a message
to Murtagh then.
If he can be warned
the Regulators are
doomed to fail,
then maybe he can convince
his men to retreat
and lives will be spared
on both sides.
Wait.
If we do stop this fight now,
what if...
doesn’t that mean the
Revolutionary War won’t happen?
And America will never
become America.
Ye say some people believe
this is the spark.
Couldn’t the spark alight
from somewhere else?
Yes, it could.
What matters are
the men in my charge,
the Regulators fighting
for what they believe in,
and my godfather.
ROGER:
I agree.
I’ll deliver the message
to Murtagh.
[ ominous music ]
It’s too dangerous.
I know, but I’m the only one
that can do it.
He knows me.
He knows I’m from the future.
He’ll believe it.
♪
Yeah, all right.
Ye’ll leave at nightfall.
Keep this in your pocket.
Then they willna see ye come
from the other side.
And if ye’re threatened...
♪
Wave this and cry "truce"
and tell them to fetch me.
Dinna say more until I come.
Aye.
♪
[ tense music ]
Belladonna, laudanum...
oil of juniper, pennyroyal,
alcohol, and my secret weapon.
BRIANNA:
The penicillin.
If I’d had it at Prestonpans,
imagine the lives
I could have saved.
Maybe you’ll save some today,
and I’ll stay and help.
It’ll keep me from worrying.
Jamie assured us
under the flag of truce,
no one will trouble Roger.
Will the flag of truce
really help him
if he’s still over there
when the shooting starts?
If the shooting starts.
Let’s just hope he manages
to convince Murtagh.
[ exhales sharply ]
MURTAGH:
Tryon’s left us no choice.
He’s lied to us in the past!
[ crowd clamoring ]
MURTAGH:
We canna submit to tyranny!
‐ CROWD: No!
‐ MAN: Never!
MURTAGH:
We’re not resisting
law and order.
We are fighting injustice!
[ crowd cheers ]
Tryon will regret the day
that he chose to ignore
our demands.
His blood will soak
this ground!
[ crowd cheering ]
Now go.
Be ready for the morrow.
[ indistinct chatter ]
[ whispers ]
What the devil
are ye doing here?
I need to talk to you.
Murtagh, you’re going
to lose this battle.
Brianna saw the name
"Alamance" on a map,
and she remembered
the Regulators lose.
‐ What?
‐ ROGER: Aye.
Jamie wanted you to know
that the best thing
that you can do is leave now,
convince your men to disperse.
Christ, MacKenzie,
ye saw the men.
Ye think they’ll yield
in this fight?
I believe that they might,
if you tell them to.
If you don’t,
they’ll be slaughtered.
How many men does Tryon have?
‐ More than a thousand.
‐ We have twice that number.
But Tryon has
a trained militia.
You‐you have farmers
with knives and pitchforks.
And they’re brave as lions.
They’ll fight
when the time comes.
Tryon has cannons,
for Chrissakes.
Murtagh, most of your men
have never even seen a cannon.
You have no officers,
you have no cavalry,
you have no artillery.
Listen to me, man.
You cannot win.
You do not win.
The history has been written.
Then I do fight.
[ chuckles ]
How can I tell them
to cast aside
everything they’ve fought for,
just give up?
They’ll not be giving up.
They’ll be living
to fight another day.
And if‐if they wait‐‐
if you wait,
in a few years, we’ll all be
fighting on the same side.
Do ye ken how long
a few years is
to men who’ve lost everything?
♪
GOVERNOR TRYON:
To those who style
themselves Regulators...
In reply to your petition...
MURTAGH:
"I have been ever attentive
"to the interests
of your county
and to every individual
residing therein."
[ scoffs ]
‐ MURTAGH: "I lament..."
‐ TRYON: I lament
the fatal necessity
to which you have now
reduced me...
by withdrawing yourselves
from the mercy of the Crown...
BOTH: "And the laws
of your country."
MURTAGH:
"I require you
who are now assembled..."
To lay down your arms,
surrender up your leaders,
and submit yourselves to the
leniency of the government.
"By accepting these terms
within one hour,
"you will prevent
an effusion of blood...
"as you are at this time
in a state of war
and rebellion..."
Against your king,
your country...
♪
"And your laws."
Signed, William Tryon.
[ crowd murmuring ]
♪
I spoke wi’ the men.
[ Murtagh sighs ]
I tried to convince them...
But they willna turn back now.
This battle will happen.
Ye’ve done yer best here...
but it’s for ye to return
to yer own camp.
Leave now...
before it begins.
If your men won’t,
then I urge you‐‐
no, Murtagh, I beg you...
time is running out.
Leave and save yourself.
Please.
For the love
your godson bears you.
♪
[ children giggling ]
Morag.
Mistress MacKenzie.
MORAG:
Mr. MacKenzie.
♪
It’s good to see you again.
Are you in good health,
and your child, Jemmy?
We’re well, both of us.
Pleased to hear.
I’ve my own son now.
His name’s Jemmy,
Jeremiah, as well.
It was my father’s name.
’Tis a fine, strong name.
I’ve thought of you
now and then.
Oh, aye.
I do thank ye, Mr. MacKenzie.
I’ll not forget
how ye saved us
from that
heartless sea captain.
Mrs. MacKenzie, wait.
I’ve something I need
to tell you.
Oh, I’m sorry, your laundry.
Here.
‐ [ heads thud ]
‐ MORAG: Oh!
Mary and Bride!
[ both sigh ]
Did I hurt you?
I’m sorry.
Nay.
I’ve a thick skull,
my ma always said.
I’ve a thick skull too,
runs in my family.
[ laughs ]
Your husband,
is he one of the Regulators?
Aye, of course.
I’m with the militia.
The thing I wanted
to tell you‐‐to warn you,
the governor, he’s serious.
He’s brought troops.
He’s brought cannon.
He means to put down this
rebellion, do you understand?
You must tell your husband,
leave before anything happens.
Leave and go where?
♪
We have no home to go back to.
You’re with child.
♪
Look, I have to go,
but Mistress MacKenzie,
hear me.
If anything should happen,
come to me.
I’ll take care of you.
Your family’s welcome
on Fraser’s Ridge.
♪
BUCK:
Get away from my wife.
♪
Captain MacKenzie!
Anyone seen Roger Mac?
No, I havena, Colonel.
Not hide nor hair of him,
I’m afraid.
Been hours since I laid eyes
on the captain.
Christ, where is he?
Colonel Fraser!
[ clears throat ]
Governor.
I thought you’d cut
a striking figure in this.
Sir?
Well, you’re one
of my best officers.
I’m not gonna have you mistaken
for an insurgent.
I appreciate the gesture,
Your Excellency,
but, uh,
I dinna think it proper
for me to wear
such a...garment.
You’re much too humble,
Colonel.
I know that you, more than most
who will take this battlefield,
are deserving of the privilege.
So please...do me the honor.
Ah. Yes.
Yes, a striking figure indeed.
Colonel Chadwick?
COLONEL CHADWICK:
Company!
[ shouts ]
♪
My apologies.
I swear I meant no disrespect.
No?
Then what the hell d’ye think
you were doing then, eh?
I met Mistress MacKenzie
aboard the Gloriana
a year or two ago.
When I recognized her here,
I thought to inquire
as to the family’s welfare.
‐ That’s all.
‐ He met nae harm, William.
It was him who found
me and Jemmy in the hold
when we hid there.
He brought us food and water.
He cared for us that night
when the sailors threw
the sick ones into the sea.
Oh, aye?
Who’s this, Buck?
That’s what I mean to find out.
Ye go back with the women,
Morag.
I’m gonna settle
with this fella.
‐ But he hasna done anything!
‐ Listen to me.
Ye think it’s nothing
when a man coories into ye
in public like a common radge?
‐ No!
‐ Now I told ye to get back.
So go now.
‐ [ Morag gasps ]
‐ [ William grunts ]
MORAG: William!
‐ Get away from me, woman!
‐ [ Morag yelps ]
[ both grunting ]
[ man groans ]
Get him up.
[ all grunting ]
[ blow lands, Roger grunts ]
She’s a MacKenzie.
I’m a MacKenzie.
We’re blood.
That’s why I was trying
to help her.
What’s this?
[ ominous music ]
Ye’re with the militia,
aren’t ye?
I came to warn you about Tryon.
Oh, so ye’re a wife‐stealer
and a traitor,
all tied up in a wee bundle,
is it?
Ah, slit his throat, I say,
and good riddance.
A man who’s sure of his wife
needn’t worry
that someone else may try
to steal her.
I’m sure of my own wife
and have no need of yours.
BUCK: Married, are ye?
Well, yer wife must be
ill‐favored, surely,
for ye to be sniffing
after mine.
Or perhaps she put ye
out of her bed
because ye couldn’t
serve her decently.
[ growls ]
You let me go, sir,
and I’ll not speak against you,
for your wife’s sake.
Aye.
No.
I dinna think ye well.
[ grunts ]
Speak against me, that is.
[ tense music ]
♪
Jesus H. Roosevelt Christ.
Tryon...
Insisted.
I imagine you weren’t
in a position to refuse.
[ man shouting ]
There’s no sign of Roger.
We dinna ken
if he succeeded or...
havena heard,
but the battle is upon us.
MAN: Company!
Will ye wish me luck, then?
I can’t let you go
without saying something.
♪
I suppose "good luck" will do.
I love you, soldier.
♪
"Good luck" will do.
"I love you"
does so much better.
♪
[ man shouts ]
That obituary Bree brought us,
I dinna ken if it’s true.
But what I do ken is this.
There may come a day when
you and I shall part again,
but it willna be today.
[ man shouts ]
♪
[ dramatic music ]
We go in hard.
Protect ourselves.
♪
We’re not here to kill
our brothers.
We’re here to end this.
Put the fear of God in them,
they’ll retreat.
This doesna have to be
a massacre.
Take prisoners, save souls.
♪
Watch for MacKenzie.
Cannons!
MAN: Fire!
[ cannon booms ]
‐ [ gunshot ]
‐ [ grunts ]
First line, fire!
‐ Fire!
‐ [ gunshots ]
Ahh!
♪
Fire, God damn you!
Fire on them or fire on me!
♪
Fire!
MAN: Forward!
Second rank, fire!
[ grunts ]
♪
[ gunfire ]
MAN: Forward!
[ all yelling ]
♪
[ gunshots ]
[ grunts ]
♪
[ distant gunfire ]
JAMIE: Find cover!
[ gunfire ]
We fight as they do.
Myers, with me.
[ both grunting ]
♪
[ both panting ]
[ grunts ]
CLAIRE:
Come take his coat off
and his waistcoat,
and I’ll come
and reassess the wound.
[ dramatic music]
♪
Don’t worry.
He was probably
just on his way back
and then joined the fight.
I just don’t know
which is worse:
that he’s missing
or getting shot at.
[ gunshot ]
[ men yelling ]
[ Isaiah groaning ]
MAN:
Mistress Fraser.
Isaiah!
Here.
Get him up here.
Easy.
Let me see.
He’s been shot through the lung
from behind.
Here.
Isaiah, can you hear me?
Tell Ally I love her.
You’re not going to die on me,
you hear?
[ gasps ]
Baby comes next month.
And you’ll be there.
Bree, get me the alcohol.
‐ Ahh!
‐ [ both grunt ]
[ grunting ]
Come! Come on!
Come on, let’s go.
Come on, help him.
Let’s go, quick.
[ man yells ]
Ah!
[ grunts ]
♪
[yells ]
[ exhales sharply ]
RICHARD:
What’s that ye’re giving him?
It’ll help him heal.
[ gunshot booms distantly ]
Morton.
I hope you didn’t waste any
good medicine on that coward.
He was running away
like a scared rabbit
when he was felled.
[ strained ]
I wasna running away.
Ye saw what happened.
[ gasping ]
Powder burns were on his back.
So whoever shot him,
shot him at close range.
No woman speaks to me
like that.
What have you done?
♪
No.
[ gunfire ]
[ man yelling distantly ]
♪
[ blow falls ]
[ gunshot ]
[ panting ]
Withers!
Lee Withers!
For God’s sake, man,
do ye not recognize me?
I mean ye no harm.
Ye mean me nae harm,
but ye wear the coat
of my enemy.
And yer fellows,
they‐they kill wi’out mercy.
Withers, listen,
I dinna want to shoot ye.
Bryan Cranna is dead.
[ grunts ]
[ gunshot ]
I did what you said, Colonel.
I didna waver.
♪
[ panting ]
I released ye from yer oath.
Ye had no cause to save me.
Ye should ha’ done as I asked.
[ gasping ]
I’d never betray yer mother...
[ panting ]
No matter who asked.
[ wheezing ]
♪
‐ Ghoistidh.
‐ [ gasps ]
♪
Dinna be afraid...
[ speaks Gaelic ]
It doesn’t hurt a bit to die.
♪
[ gasps ]
[ whimpers softly ]
♪
Murtagh.
[ solemn music ]
♪
Help me.
Help me!
♪
‐ Colonel, I‐I think he’s‐‐
‐ Help me now!
♪
[ panting ]
[ speaks Gaelic ]
We’ll take ye to Claire.
She’ll ken what to do.
This way.
All will be well.
♪
Claire!
Save him!
[ both grunt ]
What do you need?
What is it?
♪
Here.
Do what you must.
Heal him.
♪
I’m sorry.
He’s gone.
♪
He canna be.
He canna.
[ breathing shakily ]
♪
Do something.
Save him!
[ breathes heavily ]
♪
[ panting ]
Take it back.
I dinna release ye
from yer oath.
♪
Ye canna leave me.
[ somber music ]
♪
[ whispers ]
Ghoistidh.
♪
Jamie.
[ sniffles ]
Murtagh.
♪
[ sobs ]
My friend.
♪
[ sobs ]
Colonel Fraser.
Victory tastes sweet,
does it not?
They are finished.
We must celebrate
this glorious day.
Is the slaughter
of innocent men
cause to celebrate?
Not sure I take your meaning,
Colonel.
I meant exactly what I said.
Now, I understand how difficult
it must have been
to engage your own countrymen.
But what we have accomplished
here today
will be written about
in history.
Will it be written
in history, sir,
the ye killed and maimed
and paid no heed
to the destruction ye left?
That you brought cannon
upon your own citizens?
No.
It’ll say that ye
put down rebellion...
preserved order,
punished wickedness...
did justice in the king’s name.
But ye and I both know
what happened here.
There is the law
and there is what is done.
What ye have done
is kindle a war
for the sake of your own glory.
I had no personal stake
in this,
no need to glorify
my own exploits, as you put it.
None?
So you have the governorship
of New York.
I told you‐‐
I told you I would not leave
North Carolina
in a state of disorder
and rebellion.
Now I have done
what I have done
as a matter of duty.
And because you have done
your duty as promised...
I am going to overlook
your insolence.
Aye.
I’ve paid my debt...
and I’m finished
with my obligation to you
and to the Crown.
You may have
your coat back, sir.
♪
[ exhales sharply ]
[ sniffles ]
♪
Roger?
[ grunts ]
[ horses whinny ]
[ dramatic music ]
♪
Ah!
[ grunting ]
♪
CLAIRE: Have you seen
Captain MacKenzie?
[ man groaning ]
♪
BRIANNA: Have you seen
Roger MacKenzie?
Are you sure?
MAN: Roger MacKenzie!
JAMIE:
Colonel.
♪
What happened here?
Why did ye hang these men?
Regulator prisoners.
Tryon ordered their execution.
Have ye seen
Captain MacKenzie
of Fraser’s Ridge?
No, Colonel, I have not.
BRIANA: Have you seen
Captain MacKenzie?
Have you seen
Have ye seen Captain MacKenzie?
♪
Roger?
Bree.
[ speaks Gaelic ]
♪